3 Replies
There are many classifications of video games. These classifications are also known as genres. Video games can be classified into several distinct genres. Video games are most often classified into groups that represent what kind of system they are played on, like games that are made for computer systems or games that are made for consoles.
These genre include action, shooter, action-adventure, adventure, role-playing, simulation, strategy, puzzles, cards, and race. Video games can be put into many different categories based on the way they are played. Shooter games like Call of Duty are much different then puzzle games like Tetris.
Action video games are games that usually emphasize physical challenges, including hand-eye coordination and reaction time. In most action games, the player typically controls the character of a protagonist. The character must navigate a level, collecting objects, avoiding obstacles, and battling enemies with various attacks. The player wins the game by finishing a sequence of levels.
Shooter video games also test a players's speed and reaction time. Shooter games tend to focus on a character using some sort of weapon, usually a gun. The purpose of shooter games is to shoot opponents and proceed through missions.
Action-adventure games are video games that combines elements of the adventure game genre with various action game elements. It is perhaps the broadest and most diverse genre in gaming.
An adventure game is a video game in which the player assumes the role of protagonist in an interactive story driven by exploration and puzzle-solving. Nearly all adventure games are designed for a single player.
A role-playing game is a game in which players assume the roles of characters in fictional setting.  Role-playing video games typically rely on a highly developed story and setting which is divided into a number of quests.
Simulation video games are games that are designed to closely simulate aspects of a real or fictional reality. Majority of all games fits into this category.
Strategy video games focus on careful planning and skillful resource management in order to achieve a  goal. These are also know as the thinking games.
Puzzle video games require the player to solve logic puzzles or even navigate complex locations.
The last to genres are cards and race which are self explanatory.
In addition, a video game can fit into many different genres. The more genres a game includes, the better the player enjoys the game. For example, a video game called Grand Theft Auto has included basically all the genres within their video games. Because of this, Grand Theft Auto has become the top selling franchise of a video game.
This entry was posted in Uncategorized on
