What are the basic types of player? Can we uncover a comprehensive inventory of play styles? What would this teach us about games and game design?
 
Below you will find descriptions of nine hypothetical player patterns that I would expect to find by examining the gaming audience in terms of the following three areas:
Caillois' patterns of play, Agon , Alea , Mimicry and Ilinx , plus Ludus and Paidia . No study has ever been conducted on player attitudes to these patterns, and I believe it could be useful.
Emotions. Not just the ones Nicole Lazzaro reports in her Four Keys Model (which of course I adore), but all the emotions that might apply: Sadness/Agony, Anger, Surprise/Fear, Disgust/Contempt, Amusement, Contentment, Excitement/Relief, Wonder, Bliss, Fiero, Naches, Elevation, Gratitude, Schadenfreude, Guilt/Shame, Embarrassment, and Envy. Plus emotion-like behaviours such as Curiosity, Belonging and Greed. (See here for more information). I expect to broadly validate the Four Keys model, strengthen the implied connection between Anger and Fiero, and demonstrate further connections previously unexplored such as Amusement outside of People Fun and Contentment as a key play emotion previously overlooked because of the method used for Four Keys.
Skills (derived from Temperament Theory), namely Strategic , Tactical , Logistical and  Diplomatic skill sets.
Additionally, as before, data on favourite games would be collected. (We didn't learn much from least favourite games, and I'm disinclined to bother with it this time). A few more pointers will also be included.
 
The method will, alas, be survey based, relying on self-reporting. As such, it will be prone to errors, but I believe it may still be worthwhile. As before, we will follow up with case studies.
Now, let's look at the hypothetical patterns. The first four "basic players" are named after the DGD1 types; the remaining five express areas I feel that first model overlooked.
 
The (Hypothetical) 9 Basic Players
Conqueror
"I'll beat any challenge"
Play: Hard Agon
Emotions: Anger/Fiero, (Fear?)
Skills: Strategic, Tactical & Logistical
The fiero-seeking Conqueror is the economic mainstay of the upper market of videogames, thriving on a diet rich in First Person Shooters. Challenge is the draw for this player – when the complaint "it was too easy" is heard, it is heard from a Conqueror. Fiero, the emotion of "triumph over adversity" requires that the player be put through the ringer, pushed to their limits, and as a result anger and (possibly) fear are likely to be related emotions. It is likely that Conquerors are younger on average than other players.
 
"I have to know how it works"
Play: Complex Ludus, Agon
Skills: Strategic
 
The strategic-minded manager is a complexity-seeking player. Games with many rules, including both strategy games, and certain cRPGs, are the mainstay of such a player, although adventure games will also be enjoyed by many. Although fiero is likely to be a theme, the Manager is less dependent upon this one emotion, and seeks the satisfaction of knowledge or mastery, expressed through the feeling of contentment. They can rack up serious hours on the games they really love.
 
