Game Type and 
Game Genre 
By Lindsay Grace 
Game Type 
Although sometimes used interchangeably in the industry, there is a distinct 
difference between game type and game genre in video games. When 
discussing game story, we distinguish game type as a description of game play, 
and game genre as a description of the narrative content of the game. 
The following is brief list of game types: 
Action: 
Games that offer intensity of action as the primary attraction. 
Reflex response is the primary skill needed to play these games well. The most 
common action games are shooters (Doom) and stealth (Metal Gear). Action 
games also include most sports titles, although some sports titles fall into the 
category of simulation. 
 
Adventure: 
Games that offer exploration and puzzle solving as the main attraction. 
These games historically offered the most engrossing story, although their 
popularity has declined in the last 2 decades. Reasoning, creativity, and curiosity 
are the most common skills required of a good adventure game player. Pioneer 
adventure games include Myst and Syberia. 
Puzzle: 
Games that offer puzzles as the primary attraction to games. These games are 
most commonly released on low budgets via the web. 
The people who play these games tend be the oldest population of the game 
playing community. One of the most successful puzzle games is the famed 
Tetris, Lemmings and Minesweeper. I.Q. Intelligent Cube was another 
interesting puzzle game of limited success. 
2005 Lindsay Grace 
Role Playing: 
Games that offer the player an opportunity to immerse themselves in the player 
character’s situation. 
Role Playing Games (RPG) continue their rich history in storytelling by embracing 
innovative ways to vary and report story. Characters tend to be rich, game play 
is long, and character management is technical in RPGs. Famous RPGs include, 
Baldour’s Gate, Fable, Might and Magic, Neverwinter Nights, Ultima, and World 
of Warcraft. 
Simulation: 
The primary game play element of a simulation is its ability to match real world 
situations. 
Simulations seek to provide enjoyment through reenactment. Combat 
simulations and racecar simulations are relatively popular in this game type. 
Simulations may also include social situation simulation such as Sims and 
Leisure Suit Larry1
. Major games include Gran Tourismo and the Tycoon games. 
Strategy: 
Strategy games entertain through reasoning and problem solving. 
Early strategy games (e.g. Civilization) did not use much storytelling, although 
more recent games rely heavily on quality narrative. Games such as Command 
and Conquer are examples of story based strategy games. 
Game Genre
Game genre describes the way the story is told. A genre is a narrative style that 
effects the structure of the story, the depth of character, and other storytelling 
elements. 
1 OK, so Leisure Suit Larry does not “match real world situations” but it is still a simulation. This is also 
true of spaceship simulations or games that simulate the experience of piloting, organizing, or being an 
object that may have no real world equivalent. 
2005 Lindsay Grace 
The following is a list of game genres. The genre’s roughly translate to the 
genres of film and television. For anyone roughly familiar with pop culture they 
should not require an explanation: 
Genre Example 
Drama Max Payne 
Crime Grand Theft Auto 
Fantasy Kingdom Hearts, Fable 
Horror Resident Evil 
Mystery Indigo Prophecy 
Science Fiction Doom, Half Life 
War and Espionage Metal Gear Solid, Ghost Recon 
Western / Eastern / Frontier Red Dead Revolver, Ninja Gaiden 
This is not a comprehensive list. There could be, for example, a game genre for 
romance or history, but these are not listed here. 
Multiple Game Types and Game Genres Combined: 
It is important to realize that few modern games fall neatly into a single category 
of game type and game genre. Modern games take the best of all worlds and 
incorporate them into a thoroughly entertaining collection of game mechanics and 
storytelling conventions. The Grand Theft Auto series, for example, could be 
described as having a crime, fantasy genre and an action, role-playing game 
type. 
View publication stats